---
layout: post
title: The Advantages of Cloud Computing
image: /assets/img/cloud-computing.jpg
description: >
  Cloud Computing is the on demand delivery of IT resources over the internet via pay-as-you-go pricing. This post explains why Cloud Computing has become so ubiquitous over the last decade and some of the advantages of choosing to fulfill part or even all of your IT needs.
hide_last_modified: true
author: mark
---
Cloud Computing is the practice of using a network of remote servers (or services), either via the internet or  a private WAN connection in order to satisfy a computing need. Cloud providers offer a large (and ever growing) array of services to meet a variety of generalist and specialist needs, such as compute, network and storage through to artificial intelligence, big data, analytics and more. Cloud providers give a perception of "infinite scale", by constantly adding capacity to meet demand. They remove the need to concern yourself with the maintenance or purchase of the hardware or platform as well as the physical security of the services you leverage.

The three major cloud providers are Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud Platform (GCP). There are a lot of similarities between the three, and each provide core offerings of scalable compute, storage and network infrastructure. Their main differentiators are in their service offerings and appeal. AWS has the biggest market share and is generally considered the more forward thinking with the largest breadth of services. Azure often appeals to Enterprises, particularly where they are already leveraging Microsoft's software products. GCP likely appeals to developers, particularly those who are developing cloud-native applications and may want to leverage Google's advanced technologies in things like AI.

Regardless of the cloud provider you choose, there's generally a strong potential for cost savings vs traditional IT that might have required a company to build or contact a data center of fixed compute. Leveraged correctly, cloud computing can ensure you pay for what you need, but doing so required careful implementation. Lift-and-shift approaches in order to migrate to the cloud can risk costs increasing if there isn't a longer term plan to re-architecture to take advantage of the clouds features. Cloud providers also allow you to make reservations when you know you're going to need a fixed amount of resource for a long period of time (such as over 1, 3 or 5 years) and by doing so you gain access to price discounts. The best way to optimise cost is to ensure you leverage the right service/s to meet your needs. Its generally going to be cheaper to use a specific service over running your application on a Virtual Machine (VM). You also want to ensure you leverage the ability of your cloud providers resources to scale (ideally automatically) to meet demand. Previously a company would have had to have purchased a large amount of compute to meet their highest expected peak of demand, even if that only happened for a few weeks a year (such as during holiday sales). With cloud computing your resources can be scaled up to meet this demand when it occurs and scaled back down afterwards to reduce cost.

